This month, I'd like to talk about the efforts Jehovah's Organization is making to produce
the literature, publications, articles that are as accurate as possible.
We're going to talk about accuracy, accuracy of statement.
Now, first, what's the responsibility of the writer of the article?
When a writer submits an article for publication, he is expected to supply references from
reputable sources to back up the facts that he's included in his article.
And our research department will use those references to check the accuracy of everything.
Reliable, respected sources.
What do we mean by a reliable source?
Well, first of all, we go with encyclopedias, books, magazines, and then newspapers, basically
in that order.
We prefer encyclopedias over books, books over magazines, and magazines over newspapers,
generally because newspaper editors have a hard time checking their facts, they have
a very limited time in which to check their facts.
So even encyclopedias, though, and books get updated, so we have to go with the latest
edition of those.
We have to make sure that our sources are reliable.
Now when a writer quotes an expert, our researchers will ask, who's this expert?
What's his reputation?
Is he working for a particular organization?
Does this organization have an agenda?
Is that a special interest group?
If we find that the goals of the organization are questionable, we won't use the quote,
even if it's a really good quote.
Now suppose that a writer wants to quote something from a book.
In the reference material, he'll supply a photocopy of the quote in the book, but very
often he'll give us two or three pages before the quote and two or three pages after as
well.
And that way, our researchers can examine the quote in context to make sure that what
we're saying in print is really what the author of the quote had in mind.
For example, an evolutionist might make a statement which on the surface appears to confirm
his supportive creation, or perhaps an atheist will make a statement that seems to indicate
that he believes in God.
But when you examine the quote in context, you realize that that isn't what the author
had in mind at all.
We would never deliberately distort a quotation.
We try very hard to use all of our quotations in context.
Now, it's important to keep up with the very latest research, something that was stated
years ago as a fact may have been disproved.
And the reason why is obvious, someone may spend his entire life researching a very limited
point in history, a very small point in history.
And of course, if he spends so much time researching, he's going to uncover things.
And so it's not surprising that from time to time, we have to adjust our view of some
historical points.
We have to check, check, check.
And later on in this discussion, we're going to consider some examples of it.
It'll be fun.
You'll love it.
Now someone might ask, why is it necessary to be so picky, to be so fussy about accuracy?
And an answer I like to give an experience that I heard about a few years ago.
In Northern Europe, there was a man who accepted a Bible study from Jehovah's Witnesses.
And when he was asked what motivated him to want to study, he said, I read an article in
your awake magazine on trees.
Now I happen to be a bit of an expert on trees.
And after I read the article, I said to myself, that article was so well documented.
It was so precise.
Any organization that is that careful when writing about trees is going to be just as
careful when teaching me the Bible.
And on that basis, he accepted a Bible study.
Now an area where great care needs to be taken is when we're quoting statistics.
A newspaper may report on a disaster in a certain country and say that 10,000 people were
killed in the disaster.
And immediately our researchers are going to ask, where did they get that statistic?
They might phone the newspaper and ask for the source.
And if the reporter can't confirm the statistic, our researchers will go to another source,
a more official source, to get the correct statistic.
Care is also taken when quoting personalities of the past.
Now suppose we want to quote something that Napoleon Bonaparte said, the French general.
Well, being French, Napoleon spoke French.
So if we're quoting it in English, that means that somebody translated the quote from
French into English.
But did he translate the quote correctly?
Our researchers will probably go to the target language and research the quote in French
or in another language.
And more often than not, they find that what is presented in English doesn't accurately
represent what the individual said at all.
Now as we age, our memory can play tricks on us.
And our researchers are aware of that.
Suppose that an elderly brother writes in his life story that he was baptized at a circuit
assembly on a certain date.
Our researchers may look at the date, they may check the date.
And suppose they find that the date the brother gave fell on a Tuesday.
Now what are the chances that there was a circuit assembly on a Tuesday?
There may have been, but they're going to check.
Is the brother's memory failing him?
If they can't confirm the date, they may ask someone to help the brother to remember the
date more correctly, more accurately.
Perhaps someone was baptized at the same circuit assembly as he was.
And perhaps that person has an accurate note of the date.
Our translators also go to great lengths to present accurate information to the brothers
and sisters.
Sometime ago, the awake magazine published an article on a very rare species of butterfly.
Now with all animals and insects, we provide our translators with the Latin name of the
animal or the insect.
And so our translators had the Latin name.
But in one large country, they were unable to find the name in the vernacular.
So what did they do?
They phoned the country's leading university and they were transferred to the biology department.
And there, an expert gave them the name and the vernacular of that particular butterfly.
But then he said, why is it that you're worrying so much about the correct name of this butterfly?
If you got it wrong, there are only two of us on the whole country who would know the difference.
Well, that opened the way to give a witness to this expert.
Well, now how well would you do in spotting a statement that is slightly off and making
it more accurate?
Would you like to find out?
Of course you would.
It'll be fun.
So let's take a quiz that I'll call you be the editor.
We're going to put a number of statements on the screen and there's a problem with each
one of them.
Now your job is to figure out what's wrong, why it is wrong, and then suggest how to fix it.
It's going to be fun.
Here's the first statement.
According to the Smithsonian Knowledge Encyclopedia, the Egyptian Sphinx was constructed
around 2550 BCE.
The Egyptian Sphinx was constructed around 2550 BCE.
Well, the problem is with the date 2550.
The global flood occurred about 200 years after that date.
So what are the chances that the Sphinx survived the flood?
Unless, of course, you think that that's how the Sphinx lost his nose.
Now these dates are good for you schoolchildren to keep in mind when you're writing reports.
Sometimes you copy something from an encyclopedia and it gives a certain date.
But think about the date of the flood, 2370, so that what you put in your report is as
accurate as possible.
Now let's go on to the next one.
In 29 CE, Jesus was baptized by a close relative, John the baptizer.
Well, 29 CE, that looks right.
And we know that Jesus was baptized by John, that's right.
So the problem must be close relative and it is.
Now both of Jesus' parents were of the tribe of Judah and their parents were of the tribe
of Judah.
But what about John's parents, Zechariah and Elizabeth?
They were both of the tribe of Levi.
So Elizabeth and Mary couldn't have been sisters, could they have been cousins?
Maybe.
We can't even confirm that.
And if they were, that would make Jesus and John second cousins.
Well as a second cousin, a close relative.
Some would say yes, some would say no.
So it's safer just to say in 29 CE, Jesus was baptized by a relative, John the baptizer.
Here's one.
Let's see if you can spot the error in this one.
While most of the early Christians were held in littlestime in the community, a few enjoyed
and elevated social status.
For example, Luke was a respected physician.
Well the word we need to look at is respected.
Now we respect our doctors today and our doctors have a very, very fine education, but was
out the case in the first century.
A reference work says this about first century physicians.
Many doctors were freed Greek slaves, hence the social standing of doctors was quite low.
Because recovery rates were so low, many people were skeptical or even scornful of doctors.
Note this statement from the first century.
Until recently, the Aulis was a doctor.
Now he is an undertaker.
He's still doing as an undertaker what he used to do as a doctor.
Not very flattering is it?
Well in this case, we'd probably have to use a different example.
Here's one.
In 325 CE, the Roman Emperor Constantine established Christianity as the official religion of the
Roman Empire.
Well, 325 CE, that looks right and Constantine, that looks right.
But look at the word official, official religion.
Constantine never established Christianity as the official religion of the Roman Empire.
In 313, he did make it legal to be a Christian, but paganism was still one of the official religions.
Apostate Christianity didn't become the official religion until 391 CE.
This one is tricky.
See how you do on this one.
Imagine the Apostle Paul during his first imprisonment in Rome, writing his letter to the
Colossians from a dark prison cell.
Well, if you look in the back of the New World Translation, you find that Paul did write
his letter to the Colossians in Rome, and he was imprisoned at the time.
So what's the problem?
Dark prison cell.
There was Paul during his first imprisonment in his own branded house.
So the statement dark prison cell, it's very dramatic, but it's Paul wrong.
Here's an old one.
While Paul generally preached to people of the nations, Peter was sent to the Jews, contrary
to popular belief, Peter was never in Rome.
Some scholars used to make that statement and they made it 60 years ago.
Peter was never in Rome.
But can we really say that?
Can we be that dogmatic?
Can we say that he didn't even spend vacation time or have a short visit in Rome?
No, we cannot.
So it would be more accurate to state there is no record that Peter ever lived in Rome.
Here's one.
We can have confidence in the Bible.
It is mankind's oldest book.
Some scholars believe that texts written by Adam, Noah, and others survived the flood and
became part of the Bible.
And if that were true, then we could say that the Bible is mankind's oldest book.
Now, here's a quote from inside on the Scriptures, our Bible encyclopedia.
It says, there is no way to establish, definitely, that some of the histories mentioned in the
book of Genesis were committed to writing before the flood.
So today we might call the Bible one of mankind's oldest books or the world's oldest modern
book as we do in one of our videos.
Here's the last one.
In 1517, Martin Luther nailed his 95 feces on the door of a church in Vittenburg, Germany.
Well, we've highlighted 95, but there are questions about the entire statement.
As some modern scholars have done a tremendous exhaustive study of the life of Martin Luther,
and they claim that he couldn't have compiled all 95 of his theses by 1517.
Others go so far as to claim that it never happened, that he never did nail his theses on the door of the church.
Still others are just as adamant that it's all true, that it all happened.
So there's no consensus.
We would have to modify the statement, some believe, or it is believed, in order to make it more accurate,
and to acknowledge the fact that there are differences of opinion.
Well, how did you do on the quiz?
If you're like me, you've probably made some of those statements yourself,
at times.
The statements were based on the best of research we had at the time,
but this is to illustrate the fact that times change.
Research facilities improve.
A scholar does exhaustive research on one point of history,
and he uncovers things that were previously unknown.
So we have to keep up.
We have to check, check, check.
And when credible research reveals that we have to adjust or tweak a statement that we made in the past,
we do so without hesitation.
Our goal is to provide information that is as accurate as possible,
because we know that you, brothers and sisters, use this information.
You quote it in the field ministry.
You use it in your public talks.
And so we want to make sure that our brothers are fed with the most accurate,
spiritual food possible.
We're imperfect, of course, and we are going to make mistakes.
And when we do, we have to correct them.
Our goal is to do the best we can in all our imperfection.
Well, how does it make you feel?
I know how it makes me feel.
I'm grateful that Jehovah's Organization takes accuracy so seriously.
He gives me confidence.
And you know, I'm reminded of the description of another researcher,
has recorded a Decclesiastes chapter 12 and verses 9 and 10.
You know who this is.
Ecclesiastes chapter 12 and verses 9 and 10.
Not only had the congregator become wise,
but he continually taught the people what he knew.
And he pondered and made a thorough search
in order to compile many Proverbs.
The congregator sought to find delightful words
and to record accurate words of truth.